Title: Galvanize Precourse Thoughts
Date: 2015-7-5 18:30
Modified: 2015-7-5 18:20
Category: Blog
Tags: galvanize
Slug: precourse-thoughts
Authors: Cary Goltermann
Summary: Thoughts pre data science course.

### Introduction
My 12 week Galvanize Data Science Immersion course starts tomorrow, and as part of the precouse assignments they wanted to make sure that I'd be able to blog about my experiences. So for the past day I've been figuring out how to set up this blog with the python powered Pelican and get it hosted with Digital Ocean. I almost exactly followed the steps from [this](http://jamesnewbrain.com/how-to-host-pelican-github-vps-blog.html) blog. For the most part, the turorial was very easy to follow, so I want to say a quick thank you to James Fallisgaard who wrote it.
### Application Process
I guess I'll start with how I got into the program. After formally submitting an application on Galvanize's site, I was contacted the next day with a problem set that I had 4 hours to complete. There were only three problems to complete, the first having to do with word processing in python, the second having to do with a sql joins, and the last an exercise in evaluating a hypothesis testing situation.  

I did the problems that day and was contacted a few days later letting me know that I had made it to the interview process for the course. This process is comprised of two interviews conducted over google hangouts, the first in python and the second covering basic principles of probability, statistics, modeling and experimental design. The python interview wasn't particularly hard, all I had to do was write a function that took a list of words and outputed a filtered list with only words that were anagrams of others in the list. And it was pass-fail, didn't even have to optimize it at all. Since the interview was over google hangouts, I was also sent a link to a shared coding page that the interviewer set up so he could watch me code. The next interview was set up super fast, I was emailed a few hours after completing the first with a time a couple of days later that I'd have to be on another google hangout.  

The second interview, in retrospect, was not all that hard either, but I haven't had to think about math any harder than simple arithmetic for over three years. So it was a good thing that I at least tried to brush up on my probability theory beforehand. So after successfully stumbling through the second interview, which was conducted by the lead instructor, he informed me that I did well but could not guarantee that I would be accepted. Apparently they were'nt sure what student-teacher ratio they would be looking at especially with an offer letter that had already been sent out, but not yet matriculated; so I was told that I would either be accepted or be the first on the wait list. I would find out by sometime the next week. This was friday.  

After a weekend full of questioning what the next 4 months of my life would look like I was sent an acceptance e-mail on Monday morning. Over the course of the next week I applied for scholarships (the course costs $16,000), was awarded some, and signed some e-documents, after which point I was a Galvanize student.
### Precoursework
Now an official student of Galvanize, I was invited to a github repository containing a bunch of assignments intended to make sure I would be up to speed with all the knowledge that I'll be expected to know on day 1. Lots of python, some linear algebra in code, intro to pandas (I've already worked with pandas some, so it wasn't bad), sql, probability, statics, and some html stuff. I feel like it took me awhile, but I am thankful for the assignments because they forced me to shake all the rust of those parts off of my technical knowledge - or, in the case of sql, form some new neural pathways. After finishing all of the assignments, I submitted a pull request to the original repository, which I named wrong the first time, and started looking at the extra credit assignments. Running a blog about my experiences is apparently expected of me during the course. And that's why I went through all the Pelican stuff to get this blog running. And now my first post is almost done.
### Expectations
#### For the Course
I'm very much looking forward to class tomorrow. I think there are only 6 other students in the class so it's going to be pretty small. But that'll probably be nice, and I guess $16,000 should buy a pretty decent student-teacher ratio, so I'm pleased with that. The instructor seems pretty cool from the two times I've talked with him, once at an information session I attended for the course and the second in the second interview; and his LinkedIn page seems to indicate that he knows his shit. At this point, I can't ask for anymore in an instructor. Overall, I'm caught between hoping that I don't end up regreting taking the class because they're not going to teach me anything I can't easily teach myself, and praying that I'm not woefully ill-prepared for the course and will end up immediately behind my peers. Here's to landing in the middle of that spectrum, because it seems like that would be the sweet spot between learning and challenge.
#### For the Blog
I've been meaning to start blogging for awhile, not because I think that I have anything particularly useful to put out on the interwebs, but more so I have a place to publically put some thoughts. I can only hope that some of those thoughts aren't completely useless.

Tomorrow is probably going to be a pretty long day, but I want to start this whole blogging thing on the right foot. So I'll at least post something small tomorrow... And now I wish I had a cool signoff phrase. I guess that's one more thing to think about tomorrow. Go-go-gadget subconsious!
